The Vigenère cipher was devised by Blaise de Vigenère (1523–1596), a French diplomat. Diplomats and other government officials of the time made frequent use of codes and ciphers to send messages they hoped would give their country an advantage in some way in dealing with other countries. Vigenère's cipher used an alphabet to establish the key, or method of decoding the cipher. Many different versions of an alphabet could be used for the code, which is why it is called a polyalphabetic code. Very often, the English alphabet would be used.

The code would be established by means of a Vigenère square. For the twenty-six-character English alphabet, this square would be made up of twenty-six squares across and twenty-six squares down the side. The alphabet would be written across and down, one letter to a square. The alphabet is then repeated over and over until all blocks are filled, but the letters are shifted to the left one position, so the second row starts with the letter b, the third row with the letter c, and so on. Cryptographers call this a Caesar shift; it is said it was developed by Julius Caesar (100 BCE–44 BCE) for military communications.

This square is used by means of a keyword, which all parties using the code know. To use the code, the keyword is written out underneath the text to be encoded, also called the plaintext. The keyword is repeated as many times as necessary to make it as long as the plaintext. To further obscure the meaning, all punctuation, breaks between words, and capitalization is omitted, and the plaintext and keyword are broken into groups of five letters.

The coder now uses the Vigenère square by finding the first letter of the plaintext in the alphabet that goes across the top of the square and the first letter of the code word in the alphabet that goes down the side of the square and following each line to where it intersects. The letter in the block where the top column and the side column meet becomes the first letter of the code. This process is repeated until the entire message is encoded.

The person decoding the message works the process in reverse. The decoder takes the first letter of the coded message and finds where it appears on the square in relation to the keyword down the side. By following where the first letter of the keyword and the first letter of the encoded text align to the alphabet at the top, the decoder can find the first letter of the coded message.

The Vigenère cipher was broken in 1863 by Friedrich Kasiski (1805–1881), a major in the Prussian army. He used a method of determining the length of the keyword to create a series of easier-to-decrypt codes. Charles Babbage (1791–1871), considered the grandfather of the modern computer, created a different method of cracking the code in 1854. Other methods were devised that involved determining or even guessing the code word, much like some hackers attempt to guess a person's password for a computer. This method was used by Union cryptographers during the Civil War to decode Confederate messages.

In contemporary times, the Vigenère cipher is not considered secure enough to use for any real secrets or confidential information. Instead, it is often used by people who enjoy the hobby of geocaching. Geocaching involves hiding small items and leaving clues that will enable others to find them. Different forms of coding can be used, including global positioning satellite (GPS) coordinates, map coordinates, or various forms of ciphers, such as the Vigenère.